---
layout: post
title: "So MEAN"
date:   2014-08-10 15:12:19
categories: programming
---

I decided it would be fun to learn the MEAN stack. I'm already developing some level of proficiency with Javascript, and the combination of performance and language/data consistency seems like a good platform with which to launch into developing a full blown webapp. Ruby on Rails will have to wait.

## Developing a Vagrantbox

I started with the `ubuntu/trusty64` box on the vagrantcloud, modified the Vagrantfile for a provisioning script, and forwarded ports 3000 and 80 to 3030 and 8080 on the host.

Bootstrap.sh:

{% highlight sh %}
#!/bin/sh

# Bootstrap for MEAN box
# using ubuntu/trusty64 base boxv

# Install nodejs
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:chris-lea/node.js
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install nodejs git gcc make build-essential -y

# Install MongoDB
sudo apt-get install mongodb -y

# Install Bower
sudo npm install -g bower

# Install grunt
sudo npm install -g grunt-cli

# Install mean
sudo npm install -g meanio
{% endhighlight %}

This finishes without error, somewhat ominously. I `cd /vagrant/` and `mean init gzclweb`, no errors. `cd gzclweb && sudo npm install`, this time with a bunch of warnings about wanting things of an earlier version than I have installed. Running `grunt` starts everything up (gives an error about missing some c++ bson extensions), starts the server, and accessing localhost:3030 gives the 404 error. It's working!

[This SO question](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/21656420/failed-to-load-c-bson-extension) caused me to add the `sudo apt-get install gcc make build-essential` to the bootstrap.sh above. This fixed the previous errors about bson C++. MEAN is now running fantastically on my vagrantbox.


